ahhhh jesus wtf. omg. how is it. that we have these really wild intense
relationships now, with strangers on the internet. at least, I do? and many many
people do have these 'parasocial' relationships now and it feels remarkably
passive? why is it that so much of...life? of (at least my understanding of) how
to be alive and in relationship with other humans is now somehow determined(??)
by technologies / content recommendation algorithms and the way my left behind
data interacts with these systems. i find it just so politically and
existentially scary and don't feel very agentive about it particularly when it
comes to corporate social media (facebook, instagram) and new media (youtube,
tiktok). like, actually it matters who we encounter in this life, in ways that
are somehow deeper and more complex than my initial dopamine response / how long
i watch a video for ? maybe somehow, my values should be playing a role here in
terms of who i am encountering in the internet realm??

My driving purpose here is to support the mapping of political struggle. In the
face of an internet communication infrastructure that is increasingly
monopolised, normalised and mediated by content recommendation algorithms, my
overwhelming impression that political thought and desire itself on these
platforms is constantly in the process of being disfigured and sold back to us
as a set of identity categories and lifestyles which are effectively containable
and monetised. Mapping political struggle is what gives me hope.

To describe my political position, I think these three words are helpful:

- leftist, which I understand to mean desiring a redistribution of global power
  away from a minority of elites and towards a more even distribution among the
  workers of the world
- radical, or in other words, believing that this leftist vision is only
  possible through a deep and fundamental restructuring of society at the
  expense of the elite minority
- anarchist, in that I oppose hierarchies of domination at all levels of
  society, including the State, as well as structures of domination within
  social movements, and within interpersonal relationships. I support the
  freedom and autonomy of all people and communities and strongly believe in
  solidarity between communities as a force for liberation

As a result, my vision for social transformation and liberation from global
forces of oppression requires globally widespread efforts of **education** and
**coordination**. (This could be contrasted with an attitude towards revolution
that depends on strong leaders or a powerful political party with politically
correct positions claiming increasing amounts of social power in order to better
be able to enforce change.)

Education and coordination (when successful) are processes that are
fundamentally relational and deeply responsive to context. For this reason,
grassroots community organizers are always the critical agents in producing this
kind of social transformation. **There is no technological ‘solution’ to the
widespread loss of political power and agency.** However, urban life in a late
capitalist society — the life most people find themselves living now — is a
context in which the very terms of ‘relationality’ and ‘community’ are
constantly being reconfigured by forces beyond our control.

Particularly, digital technology has increasingly come to mediate urban
relationships through social media, instant messaging, videoconferencing, email,
workplace communication software, streaming platforms, subscription platforms,
gig economy jobs, dating apps, e-commerce etc. to the point where most
interactions in most of our urban relationships are mediated by technology.
**This includes political life** — at the grassroots level many of us use
(corporate) social media to coordinate and to educate, but this is
extraordinarily problematic and exposes entire communities to the risks of
mediation and co-optation described above. Large nonprofits, unions or political
parties by contrast might spend significant time or money setting up private
online networks (forums, etc) for coordination and education, but this presents
other problems. Users of private networks need to manage multiple accounts on
different platforms in order to stay engaged with more than one realm of
political struggle. The overall effect is cluttering our digital lives and
missing the opportunities of interconnectedness.

This project, which started as Radical Directory, is about filling these gaps in
our communication and trying to provide a way to connect and build things more
easily and free of some of these risks. It is a hopeful experiment in seeing
what might happen if political life in general could be mediated in a similar
way to how social life, romantic life or work life in late capitalist urban
society is mediated - but with the critical difference of being entirely
oriented towards the political liberation of all people, rather than extracting
profit. While cities can make us fractured, busy, and physically isolated from
each other, I believe technologies of communication can and do go some way
towards bringing people together in spite of it. What I’m really excited about
is the idea that with some technological support, people could build new
political relationships and organisations, and articulate their values,
analyses, strategies, plans and actions safely and easily.

My dream is that as time goes on, we can have greater clarity in how we
communicate political ideas and liberatory visions to each other, to
collectively get better at articulating the future. Technology (and really,
modernity) is constantly opening up new modes of communication, new
possibilities for self-expression, new words, visual and sonic channels that
make these liberatory visions more easily and widely accessible. New tools for
knowledge workers allow for greater resource-sharing, collaboration, precision,
and understanding. Ultimately, in working on this project, I hope that together
we can harness these tools and opportunities to create the worlds we dream of.
